Random Grid Search Optimization Examples
Created: 17 June 2017
----------------------------------------
This directory contains two physics examples, Higgs and SUSY, each with three
different RGS optimizations. In the Higgs example, we try to enhance the Higgs
vector boson fusion signal relative to the di-Z boson and Higgs gluon gluon
fusion background. We work with the 4-lepton final states, where the leptons
are electrons and, or, muons. In the second example, we explore the use of
staircase and other cuts in constructing optimal cut-based searches for SUSY
using the razor variables, MR and R2.

RGS optimization consists of two steps. In the first step, run using the
command

   ./train.py

the signal and background counts associated with each cut are determined and the
results stored in a ROOT file. In the second step, the results stored in this
ROOT file are analyzed using the command

   ./analysis.py

which computes the Z value of each cut and finds the best one, that is, the one
with the hightest Z value.

For each terminal session, it is necessary to define a few environment
variables by "sourcing" the setup scripts from the RGS directory:

    source setup.sh   (for a bash shell)
    
(Note: setup.sh can in fact be executed from any directory, but if you are using
a non-bash shell, currently, setup.csh must be executed from RGS.)

(1) Higgs boson example
-----------------------
In this example, we use RGS optimization to find cuts that produce a sample of 
13 TeV events in the 4-lepton final states enriched in Higgs vector boson
fusion (VBF) events relative to di-Z boson (ZZ) events and Higgs boson events
produced through gluon gluon fusion (ggF). Three optimizations are considered,
labeled HO1, HO2, and HO3. 

HO1
---
One-sided cuts

   Z1mass <
   Z2mass <

on the Z-boson masses, Z1mass and Z2mass, and specified in the file HO1.cuts,
are used to discriminate between Higgs boson events (ggF+VBF) and ZZ events.
There is no explicit restriction on the 4-lepton mass (mass4l). The results of
the second step are written to the file r_HO1.txt, the cuts are represented
graphically in h_HO1.pdf, and a receiver operating curev (ROC) in shown in the
file h_HO1_ROC.pdf.

HO2
---
This is like HO1, except that we use two-sided cuts, specified as follows 

   Z1mass <>
   Z2mass <>

in the file HO2.cuts and we restrict events to the signal region defined by
100 < mass4l < 150 GeV. Note that the cuts form a closed rectangle in the
(Z1mass, Z2mass) plane.

HO3
---
The optimal cuts from HO2 are imposed along with the restriction to the signal
region and the one-sided cuts

   detajj >
   massjj >
   
are applied to the absolute difference between the pseudo-rapidities of the
jets, detajj, and the di-jet mass, massjj.


(2) SUSY example
----------------
In this example, we consider gluino pair production at 13 TeV. The gluinos (of
mass 1355 GeV) decay exclusively to a light top squark (of mass 409 GeV) and a
top quark (of mass 173.2 GeV). The top squark then decays to a W boson and b
quark and a (lightest) neutralino (of mass 252 GeV). (The top squark cannot
decay to a top quark because the mass difference

mass(top squark) - mass(neutralino) < mass(top)).

This decay sequence leads to multiple jets and multiple b jets. There is also
a high probability to have final states with boosted W bosons due to the
boosted top quark produced in the gluino decay. 

In order to exploit these event characteristics, we explore three optimizations
denoted SO1, SO2, and SO3. As in the Higgs example, each is run in two steps
by executing the Python programs train.py and analysis.py.

SO1
---
This optimization finds the best 20-step staircase cut for events that
satisfy the criteria (njet >= 3) && (j1pT > 200) && (nb >= 1) && (nW >= 1),
where njet, j1pT, nb, nW, are the number of jets, leading jet pT, number of
b-jets, and the number of boosted W bosons, respectively.

SO2
---
This is the same as SO1, but in addition we optimize one-sided cuts on njet,
j1pT, nb, and nW.

SO3
---
This is the same as SO2, except that the events used in the optimization
satisy (njet >= 3), with no "preselection" on j1pT, nb, and nW.

